people though they've really are it's
just fucking hard business especially
when you didn't see it coming to one
hello Renee hello thanks for doing this
I really appreciate it thanks for having
me I listen to you on Sam Harris's
podcast and I was utterly stunned I had
to listen to it twice cuz I just
couldn't let's get into let's get into
this from the beginning how did this
start out how did you start researching
these online Russian trolls and BOTS and
all this jazz yeah so a couple of years
back and around 2015 I I had had my my
first baby in 2013 and I was getting on
these preschool lists and what I decided
to do was I started looking at anti
vaccine activity in California because I
had a kid and I wanted to you know put
him on preschool Lister I was gonna fit
with the parents basically as someone
who vaccinates and I started looking at
the way that small groups were able to
kind of disproportionately amplify
messages on social channels and some of
this was through very legitimate
activity and then some of it was through
really kind of coordinated deliberate
attempts to kind of game ways that
algorithms were amplifying content
amplifying particular types of
narratives and I thought it was
interesting and I started writing about
it and I am I wound up writing about
ways in which hashtag gaming ways in
which people were kind of using
automation to just be in a hashtag all
the time so it was kind of a way to
really gain control of share voice and
what that meant when very small groups
of people could achieve this kind of
phenomenal amplification and what the
pros and cons of that were and then this
was 2015 so the way that that this sort
of awareness of social media challenges
came came about was actually when I was
working on this other people were
looking at it from the same looking at
the same tactics but how they were being
used by Isis by the terrorist
organization and they're also you had
this very small group of people that
managed to use BOTS and amplification to
really kind of own a narrative really
push this this brand this digital
caliphate to kind of build it on all
social platforms almost simultaneously
and the ways in which information was
hopping from one platform to another
through kind of deliberate coordinator
and then also just ways in which
information flows kind of contagion
style and I wound up working on thinking
about how the government was going to
respond to the challenge of terrorist
organizations using American social
platforms to spread propaganda so what
we came to realize was that there was
just this information ecosystem and it
had evolved in a certain way over a
period of about eight years or so and
the kind of unintended consequences of
that and the way that Russia kind of
came into the conversation was around
October 2015 when we were thinking about
what what to do about Isis what to do
about terrorism and and terrorists you
know kind of proliferation on social
platforms this was right around when
Adrienne Chen had written the article
the agency for the New York Times and
that was one of the first big expose of
the Internet research agency the first
time an American journalist had gone
over there and actually met the trolls
been in st. Petersburg and began to
write about what was happening over
there and the ways that they had pages
that were targeting certain facets of
American culture so while we were in DC
talking about what to do about
terrorists using these platforms to
spread propaganda there were beginning
to be rumblings that Russian
intelligence and you know Russian
entities were doing the same thing and
so the question became can we think
about ways in which the Internet is
vulnerable to this type of manipulation
by anyone and then and then come up with
ways to stop it so that was how the the
Russia investigation began was actually
around 2015 a handful of people started
looking for evidence of Russian BOTS and
trolls on social platforms so 2015 if we
think about social media and the birth
of social media essentially it had only
been alive for I mean what was Twitter
2007 I believe something like that so
eight years like eight years of social
media and then all the sudden they
figured out how to gain this system and
then they figured out how to use this to
make people argue against each other
yeah so I think so there was this if you
go back to like remember like geo cities
and they'd okay AOL use
so we're probably bout the same age so
there have always been you know kind of
the thing that was great about the
internet like Internet 1.0 we can call
it right was this idea that everybody
was given a platform and you could use
your platform you could put up your blog
you could say whatever you wanted you
didn't necessarily get attention but you
could say whatever you wanted and so
there is this kind of consolidation as
social platforms kind of came into
existence content creators were really
excited about the fact that now they not
only had this this access to write their
own stuff but they also had access to
this audience because as the network
effects got more and more pronounced
more and more people came to be on
social platforms and it originally
wasn't even Facebook remember it was
like you know there's like Friendster
and MySpace and social networks kind of
evolved when I was in college Facebook
was still limited to like you know
handfuls like Ivy League schools and so
I wasn't even eligible and as you watch
this consolidation happen you you start
to have this information ecosystem
really dominated by a handful of
companies that grow very large because
they're providing a service that people
really want but there's a kind of mass
consolidation of audiences onto this
handful of platforms so this becomes
really interesting for regular people
who just want to find their friends
reach people spread their message grow
an audience it also becomes really
interesting for propagandists and trolls
and in this case terrorist organizations
and state intelligence services because
instead of reaching the entire Internet
they really just kind of have to
concentrate their efforts on a handful
of platforms so that consolidation is
one of the things that kind of kicks off
some of the more than one of the reasons
that we have these problems today right
so that the fact that there's only a
Facebook Twitter and Instagram and a
couple of other minor platforms other
than YouTube I mean anything that you
can tell it's an actual person like
YouTube is a problem right because you
could see it's an actual person if
you're if you're narrating something you
you know if you're in front of the
camera and explaining things people who
are gonna know that you're an actual
human being mm-hmm whereas there's so
many these accounts that I'll go to like
I'll watch people get involved in these
little online beefs with each other and
then I'll go to some of these accounts
like this doesn't seem like a real
person and I'll go
it's like hashtag Magga there's a
American Eagle in front of a flag and
then you you read they're stuffing like
wow this is this is probably a Russian
troll account and it's strange like you
feel like you're not supposed to be
seeing this like you've seen the wiring
under the board or something and then
you'll go through the timeline and all
they're doing is engaging people and
arguing you know for Trump and against
you know whatever the fuck they're angry
about whatever whatever it is that's
being discussed and they're they're
basically just like some weird little
argument mechanism yeah so in 2016 there
was a lot of that during the
presidential campaign right and there
were there was so much that was written
you know we can go back to the free
speech thing we were kind of chatting
about before there were so much that was
written about harassment and trolling
and negativity and these kind of hordes
of accounts that would brigade people
and harass them of course a lot of that
is just real Americans right there are
plenty people who are just assholes on
the internet sure but there were
actually a fair number of these as we
began to do the investigation into the
Russian operation in and it started on
Twitter and about 2014 actually so 2013
2014 the internet research agency is
targeting Russian people so they're
tweeting in Russian at Russian and
Ukrainian folks people in their sphere
of influence so they're already on there
they're already trying this out and what
they're doing is they're creating these
these these accounts it's kind of wrong
to call them BOTS because they are real
people they're just not what they appear
to be so I think the unfortunate term
for it has become like cyborgs like semi
automated you know sometimes it's
automated sometimes it's a real person
but sock puppet is the other way that we
can refer to it a person pretending to
be somebody else so you have these sock
puppets and they're out there and
they're tweeting in 2014 about the
Russian annexation of Crimea or about
mh17 that plane that went down which
Russia you know of course had no idea
what happened and it wasn't their fault
at all and gradually as they begin to
experience what I imagine they thought
of was success that's when you see some
of these accounts pivot to targeting
Americans and so in 2008 2014 early 2015
you start to see the
this strategy that for a long time had
been very inward ly focused making their
own people think a certain way or feel a
certain way or have a certain experience
on the Internet
it begins to to spread out it begins to
to look outwards and so you start to see
these accounts communicating with
Americans and as we were going through
the data sets which the Twitter data set
is public anyone can go and look at it
at this point you do see some of the
accounts that are kind of you know that
were that were somewhat notorious for
being really virulent nasty trolls
anti-semitic trolls going after
journalists you know some of these
accounts being revealed as actually
being Russian trolls now it doesn't kind
of exculpate the actual American trolls
that were very much real and active and
part of this and expressing their
opinion but you do see that they're
mimicking this they're using that same
style of tactic that harassment to get
it real people and if they do get banned
if their account gets banned they just
simply make another account they use
some sort of a you know what is it a
virtual virtual server what is that
called
means that's it yeah so if they do that
they can kind of do that as long as they
want they can continue to make new
accounts and it probably also emboldened
the actual American trolls because
they're going to go out a little bit
further than everybody else a little bit
crazier and it kind of changes the tone
of discourse within these communities
that are arguing about a certain subject
things get nastier and they're get
nastier because of the interference of
these trolls like it seems like they've
they've actually managed to not just
cause a lot of discourse but to change
the way people are interacting with each
other and to make it just make it more
more vicious yeah so the what they're
doing is they're operating in
communities so one of the really common
criticisms of you know people who a lot
of people think that this didn't have a
huge impact didn't you know did it swing
the election we have no idea but the
what it does do in the communities that
it targets is it can change that tone
and that's where you see
it's it's I mean I think everybody's
probably had this experience you're part
of a group and then a new person gets
added to the group and the dynamic
changes it's very much the same kind of
thing just that these are not real
people who are joining the group and so
there's this opportunity to to you know
kind of expand the bounds of tolerance
just that little bit more or try to
normalize using particular ways of
communicating that maybe a group
wouldn't naturally gravitate to but then
it does so there there are definitely
ways in which any any type of troll
doing this doesn't have to be a Russian
troll has this ability to kind of shift
the language if the community shift the
the culture just a little bit now when
did why did the agency do this and do we
do we know do we have someone who's ever
left there or become a whistleblower who
can give us some information about what
the mandate was and and how it was
carried out there have been a couple of
whistleblowers and actually some
investigative journalism in Russia
that's that's covered this they describe
the employees of these is the internet
research agency so it's a little bit
like a social media marketing agency
Plus tactics that we would not expect a
social media marketing agency to use
things that are a little more like what
you would expect to see from an
intelligence agency so besides just
making your pages and your blogs on your
social posts they're also in there kind
of connecting with the real people and
real activists and pretending to be
something that they're not to develop
kind of a one-on-one relationship but
most of the most of the the
whistleblowers who have come out there's
a woman named Ludmilla savage hook she
wrote an expose I believe on this and
it's described as being much like you
would expect if you were doing social
media grunt work you have a certain
number of posts per day you you know
you're driving trying to get a certain
amount of engagement you're trying
you've got to kind of hit your quotas
most people are young Millennials the
people that work there they're well
versed in trolling culture they're well
versed in internet culture you know
they're up to speed on like popular
memes and things like that and so you do
see this yeah and then the other thing
that they do is they talk about in
mueller and it--
you see some really interesting
descriptions of like the stand-ups that
they have stand up as a thing you do at
a tech company or buddy kind of stands
up and talk about your goals and
responsibilities and blockers and things
and in these stand-ups they would be
sitting there saying things like if
you're targeting black LGBT people make
sure you don't use white people in your
in your image and your mean because
that's going to like trigger them so
trying to get at the the very niche
rules for you know for communicating
authentically in an American community
which is you know online you sometimes
there are very specific ways in which a
community expects a member of that
community to communicate yeah and so
they are in there and you can read in
these filings by Mueller's team and by
the Eastern District of Virginia the the
the degree of granularity that they have
to recognize that if you are running a
black LGBT page and you're Mimas of
white people you're gonna cause some
tension and consternation and assuming
that that's not necessarily what you
want to be doing you should go find the
meme of black LGBT people to put in the
you know to put as your meme for the day
so there's a lot of there's a lot of
sophistication there's a lot of
understanding of American culture and
then there's a lot of understanding of
trolling culture and so these things
combine to be a rather effective you
know very effective social media agency
and is there an overwhelming sort of
narrative that they're trying to pursue
they're trying to push so what we saw so
I did the I did some of the research for
the Senate and the Senate data came from
the platforms so what I had was the
attribution was made by the platforms it
wasn't like ranae deciding this was IRA
it was the platform's giving it to to
our government and the information in
there what it showed was that across all
platforms across Twitter across Facebook
Instagram YouTube they were building up
tribes so they were really working to
create distinct communities of distinct
types of Americans and that would be for
example there's an LGBT page that is
very much about LGBT pride there's they
created it and they created it and
they curate it and they create it curate
it it has a you know there's like a
persona a lot of the posts on the LGBT
page or written by what sounded kind of
like a millennial lesbian was the voice
so it was a lot of you know memes of
LGBTQ actresses and they would brand it
with a specific brand mark it was a
rainbow heart LGBT United was the name
of the page it had a matching Instagram
account which you would also expect to
see from a media property right you
would expect him to see in both places
and this you know what were they pushing
it red like a would like a young woman
talking about crushes on actresses and
things actually you know it was it was
really
besides that sometimes walking English
virtually indistinguishable from what
you would read on any kind of like young
millennial focused social page it wasn't
none of it was radical or divisive it
wasn't like the way that they got the
division across was they built these
tribes where they're reinforcing in
group dynamics so you have the LGBT page
you have numerous pages targeting the
black community that was where they
spent most of their energy a lot of
pages targeting far-right so both old
far-right meaning people who are very
concerned about what is the future of
America look like and then young
far-right which was much more angry much
more like trolling culture so they
recognize that there's a divide there
that the kinds of memes you're gonna use
to target younger right-wing audiences
are not the same kinds of memes you're
gonna use to target older right-wing
audiences so there's a tribe for older
right-wing younger right-wing and the
black community there's a Baptist tribe
there's a Black Liberation tribe there's
a black women tribe there's one for
people who have incarcerated spouses
there's a brown brown power I believe
was the name of it page that was very
much about Mexican and Chicano culture
there was Native Americans United and
all of these are fake all these are fake
all these are fake and what are they
trying to do with all these so you build
up this in group dynamic and over and
they did this over years so this was not
a short-term thing they started these
pages and
2014-2015 timeframe most of them they
started some other ones that were much
more political later we can talk about
the election if you want to but with
this tribal thing you're building up
tribe so you're saying like as black
women in America this is here's posts
about things that we care about here's
posts about black hair here's posts
about child rearing here's posts about
fashion and culture and then every now
and then there would be a post that
would reinforce like as black people we
don't do this and so or as LGBT people
we don't like this and so you're
building this rapport so like me and you
were having a conversation we're
developing a relationship on this page
over time and then I say like as this
kind of person we don't believe this so
it's a way to subtly influence by
appealing to an in-group dynamic or
appealing to like as members of this
tribe as LGBT people of course we hate
Mike Pence as black people of course
we're not going to vote because you know
we hate Hillary Clinton because we hate
her husband as as people who are
concerned about the future of America as
Texas secessionists you know so so
everything is presented as members of
this tribe we think this as members of
this tribe we don't think this but a lot
of the place you know sorry but a lot of
the posts were not even political they
were just sort of affirming the
standards of the tribe yes so they were
kind of setting up this whole long game
yeah and then once they got everybody on
board how many followers are these do
these pages have so the there was kind
of a long tail there were I think 88
pages on Facebook and 133 Instagram
accounts and I would say maybe 30 of the
Facebook pages had over a thousand
followers which is not very many and
then maybe the top ten had upwards of
500,000 followers so there's you know
same way you run any social campaign
sometimes you have hits sometimes you
have flops right and what was
interesting with the flops is you would
see them repurpose them so they would
decide you know the same way if you're
running a social media agency well we've
got this audience this page isn't doing
so well it's like rebrand
a little bit change it up try to try to
make it appeal to somebody else we do
see this there was a there was um I got
this data set and I was going through
these Instagram memes and you know 133
thousand of them and I was um there is a
cluster of images of Kermit the Frog I
was like what the hell is Kermit the
Frog doing in here and so I so then I go
so this the way the platform's provide
the data is I got like a CSV of the
posts and then I got a folder of the
images and so in order to like connect
the dots I had to have the image up on
one screen and the this thing that CSV
up on the other screen CSV it's like a
spreadsheet okay yeah and I I went you
know turned it into a database that we
could track things a little bit more
easily across the platforms but um so I
have this cost of Kermit the Frog memes
and I go and I look and I realized that
the they're attributed to an account
called army of Jesus and I thought well
that's interesting
what do you know these are some of them
are really raunchy it was like it was
like Kermit Miss Piggy like you know I
mean it is just like like stupid stupid
crappy memes attached to army of Jesus
and what the hell is going on here
I keep going through it hundreds of
Kermit memes and then I get to a post
where they say like this page is owned
by Homer Simpson now Kermit went to jail
for being like I don't know they made
some like some joke it was stupid and
all of a sudden the dataset turns into
Homer Simpson memes so again like this
kind of raunchy Homer Simpson culture
and again it's tributed to army of Jesus
and then ya go through all this and
realize that they didn't get to actually
making army of Jesus a Jesus focused
page until like nine hundred posts in so
they just renamed the account at some
point it used to be called nuts news and
then they nuts news was what they called
it when it was the Kermit the Frog main
page and then it gets repurposed when
they realized Kermit's not doing it it's
not getting the audience they want Homer
Simpson's not getting the audience or
engagement they want and then they pivot
over to Jesus and then all of a sudden
they start you know the likes and things
start pouring in so what they're doing
is they're actually like either
deliberately
we're just creating placeholders it's
kind of a red flag when a brand-new
account that was created yesterday
suddenly starts talking about some
highly politically divisive thing or
whatever but if you lay the groundwork
and you do - over a period of two years
then somebody who goes and checks to see
what the account was where it came from
how old it is is gonna see something
that was two years old so it's an
opportunity to create almost like
sleeper accounts where you create them
now and then you activate them you
politicize them you actually put them to
use a couple years in the future so we
saw all kinds of we saw this over and
over again there was a black guns matter
account that turned into an anonymous
account at one point they were
pretending to be anonymous you know the
activists yeah so so they repurposed
this black guns matter page which just
had it was it was advocating that black
people buy weapons and carry and it's
like a pro Second Amendment page but for
the black community and they took that
page when it wasn't getting I guess a
ton of engagement and it became was
called oh gosh I don't really exact name
of the anonymous page and I don't want
to say it was something that's legit but
but they pivoted it into an anonymous
page and when they do that did they go
back and repurpose the con the content
of the earlier posts do they change that
was not a fear that wasn't clear we
didn't get that information from the
Malan forms there was a lot of stuff
that I would have loved to have more
insight into we could see again you know
you'd think if you started following an
army of Jesus page and yet all this
raunchy Kerman shit from like a year ago
that would raise some flags I would
assume that they scrubbed it and
restarted but I don't know do your
podcast with Sam changed how I look at a
lot of the pages that I actually follow
because I follow some pages like that
have classic cars or something like that
and then I'll see them and most of it is
just photographs of cars like beautiful
old cars and it'll have you know they'll
have a giant following and then all of a
sudden something will get political and
I'll look at it and go oh wow like this
is probably one of those weird accounts
like they're getting people to get
engaged with it because it represents
something they're interested in like
classic muscle cars and then they use it
for activism and they use it for to get
this narrative across I think I mean
I've seen it happen with some of mine
too I think one of the challenges is
like you want people to be aware that
this stuff exists but you don't want
them to be paranoid that it's I know I
look at this all day long and sometimes
I see things and I'm like you know what
are the odds but and I and I try to you
know not feel like you know you know
what if you like her and so I'm like Tom
Clancy novel but yeah it's it's this
balance between when you make people
aware of it and I think people deserve
to be aware but they deserve to
understand how this plays out the flip
side of that is you do wind up in these
weird you know you see it happen on
social media now or click into a trump
tweet and you'll see like you're a
Russian bot know you're a Russian bot
know you're like they're probably not
Russian BOTS you know it's everybody you
don't like on the Internet is not a
Russian pot yeah exactly and so that's
where you get at the interesting
conversations of you know in some ways
getting caught this is this is one of
the challenges with running
disinformation campaigns right it it
makes it really hard for people to know
what's real after the fact it leaves you
a little bit off-balance right feel like
you know when you you feel like you
can't quite tell what's real and that's
part of the goal right it's to make you
not have a not feel entirely balanced
and in your information environment is
this real is this not and so in some
ways there's not much downside to doing
this right because you do you know if
you either knock it out of the park and
you influence the election and you
influence people and you have this
secret covert operation going on for
years or you get caught and then there's
a you know until there's some confidence
in the ability of platforms to detect
this stuff there's real concern among
everybody that that you're you're
encountering something fake now
the the overwhelming narrative is that
the Russians were very much invested in
having Trump win right and if they were
very much invested in having Trump win
was the reason why they focused so
heavily on the african-american
community because the half
african-american community traditionally
seems to vote Democrat so they were
trying to do something to break that up
or trying to do something to weaken the
position of the you know the incumbent
or Hillary Clinton and maybe put some
emphasis on Jill Stein or some
alternative candidates yeah so the the
way that the political campaign the
political aspect of it played out so
they established they started building
these relationships in 2015 and you know
they're doing this this tribal thing
we've got our in group or part of this
community and then what you start to see
them do is early they're actually there
was a tiny tiny cluster in the early
primaries where they were supporting
Rand Paul and then they pivot to Trump
pretty quickly and you and probably Rand
Paul just didn't pull well and they were
like there's no way to get any lift here
but but maybe Trump was getting you know
some actual lift in the media and so so
you see them move into supporting Trump
and then for the remainder of the data
set for from 2015 through the end which
was mid 2017 or so is when this thing
ends it's it's adamantly Pro Trump on
the right and on the right you see not
only pro Trump but you see them really
working to like erode support for
mainstream or traditional Republicans
traditional conservatives you see a lot
of the memes about like are you with the
cuck Servat absorb akan Servat ofthe and
there you know and so the cox orbit is
of course are like they've got pictures
of like Lindsay Graham and John McCain
they hate John McCain John McCain shows
up a million times and Marco Rubio Ted
Cruz well I think that they you know one
of the theories is and and I believe
this is probably true they really
strongly disliked Hillary Clinton
because there was concern that she would
you know things that she was saying
about increasing freedoms in Russia were
very threatening they thought the best
bet to get sanctions removed was Trump
so they had specific out
that they were hoping for and that was
one of you know so there's always like a
political motivation so there is this
narrative around they just want to kind
of like screw with American society
create divisions amplify divisions when
you look at the political content the
clear and and sustained support for
Trump and even more than that the clear
disdain for Hillary Clinton there is not
on Facebook and Instagram there was not
one single pro-hillary post there were
some anti Trump posts because if you're
running an LGBT page of course they're
gonna say negative things about Trump
you know and and they're saying it so
you should vote for Jill Stein there was
early support and some of the
left-leaning pages for Bernie Sanders
but you actually see the support for
Bernie Sanders come in more after it
becomes clear that he's not going to win
because then they're using Bernie
Sanders as a way to say this was stolen
from him by the evil Clintons or Jill
Stein you know here's a true a true
independent real liberal we should be
voting for her if we want to support a
woman so there are these feminism pages
really pushing this narrative of Jill
Stein so you have the left-leaning pages
totally anti Clinton and then you have
the right landing pages staunchly Pro
Trump and also strongly anti Cruz anti
Rubio anti Lindsey Graham basically
Entei every now what's called
establishment Republican and there's
this kind of pushing of people to
opposite opposite ends of the political
spectrum this is where you get at the
conversation around facilitating
polarization so not just it wasn't
enough to just support Donald Trump it
was also necessary to strongly disparage
the kind of traditional conservative
moderate center-right in the course of
amplifying the Trump candidacy does that
make sense
yes it does a lot of stuff yeah there's
a lot of stuff but it does make sense
and one of the things that was really
bizarre to me watching the election and
I was trying to figure out is this
because Trump is so bombastic and he's
so outrageous and he's just a different
person that the the way I was describing
on stage was that like finally the
assholes have a king
because they never had a king before
like everyone who was running for
president was at least mostly dignified
I mean basically it's really difficult
to go back in time and find someone who
isn't find someone who there's no one
who insults people like he does I mean
he insults people's appearances he calls
them losers
he called stormy Daniels horse face I
mean he says some outrageous shit so
part of it was me thinking like wow
maybe he's just ignited and emboldened I
actually had this conversation with my
wife today she was like it feels like
racism is more prevalent like it's more
it's more accepted people feel more
emboldened because they're in their mind
they think he is a racist I can get away
with more things Trump as president like
there's actually videos of people saying
racist shit and saying hey Trump's
president now we can do this so I was
thinking that well maybe that's what it
was just sort of like some rare flower
that only blooms under the right
conditions poof its back right but when
you think about the influence that these
pages have had in establishing
communities and this long game that
they're playing like the LGBTQ pages
even though they're shitting on Trump
they really want to support Jill Stein
because they know that'll actually help
Trump because it'll take votes away from
Hillary Clinton that they it seems
different like political discourse
discussions online and social media the
way social media reacted there's a lot
of people that were anti Obama before
you know me either a either of his
election so they won but it seemed
different
it seemed different to me than this one
this one seemed like like we had moved
into another level of hostility that
never experienced before and another
level of division between the right and
the left that I had never experienced
before and like a willingness to engage
with really harsh nasty comments and
just to dive into it you would see it
all day I mean there's there's certain
Twitter followers that I think they're
pretty much human beings but I would
follow them
and they would just be engaged with
people all day long just shitting on
people and criticizing this and
insulting that and it seemed like it
seemed dangerous it seemed like things
had moved into a much more aggressive
much more hostile and confrontational
sort of chapter in American history if
this is all done at the same time that
this is happening how much of an
influence do you think this IRA agency
had on all this stuff that's the yeah
that's the question that we would all
like the answer to and you unfortunately
can't give it and so in your mind though
yeah let me let me kind of caveat that
the thing that we don't have that nobody
who looks at this on the outside has is
we can't see what people said in
response to this stuff so I've looked at
now almost two hundred thousand of these
posts as I spent most of last year doing
was was this was this research and we
can see that they have thousands of
engagements thousands of comments
thousands of shares we have no idea what
happened afterwards and that's the
problem so when once this stuff comes
down it's really hard to go back and
piece it together so I can see that
there are some of your point that
they're really really just fucking
horrible troll accounts that they ran
they didn't necessarily have a lot of
followers but you see them in there like
adding people so they're you know at and
then the name of a reporter at the name
of a prominent person and so they're in
there kind of like draft on the
popularity of you know famous people
basically mm-hmm and they're just saying
like horrible shit and it's the tone is
so spot-on and one thing that was
interesting with a couple of them is
like if you go and you look at their
profile information which was also made
public they would have like they would
have a big AB account in their in their
profile that was like so they would so
it was a remarkable piece of kind of a
culture in which you see that like
they're actually sitting on gab - right
and so they can also go and they can
draw on their in reddit there's you know
nine hundred or something troll accounts
were found on reddit they're on tumblr
and so they're just picking the most
divisive content and they're pushing it
out into communities and at the same
time we can see that they're doing it
but we can't see what people do in
return we can't see did they just block
did they have the fight back did was
there a huge you know when this happens
on a Facebook page and they're doing
something like telling black people not
to vote as black people we shouldn't
vote what do people say in response and
that's the piece that we don't have so
when we talk about impact a lot of the
impact conversation is really focused on
did this swing the election we don't
have nothing that I've seen has the
answer to that question the other thing
is you but but the second question the
thing when I think about impact I think
from from I think you and I agree on
this it also matters how does this
change how people relate to each other
and we have no real evidence of no
information on that either this is the
kind of thing that lives in some you
know Facebook has it the rest of us
haven't seen it now are most of these
people is this mostly Facebook is it
mostly Twitter where what does how does
it break down yeah so there were hearing
my like little stats here ten twenty of
their own data there were ten and a half
million tweets of which about six
million were original content created by
about thirty eight hundred accounts
there were about a hundred and thirty
three and they just read it one hundred
thirty three Instagram accounts with
about a hundred and sixteen thousand
posts and then eighty one Facebook pages
and seventeen YouTube channels with
about eleven hundred videos and so they
got about 200 million engagements on
Instagram and about another seventy five
million or so on Facebook engagements
are like like shares comments reactions
you know so it's hard to contextualize
but what we think happened you know you
can go and you can try to look at how
well did this content perform relative
to other real authentic media targeting
these communities and what you see with
the black community in particular is
their Instagram game was really good
there so they're on their Instagram
accounts the you know the top five three
of them
targeted the black community and got you
know tens two hundred millions of
engagements so I would have to pull up
the exact number is it mostly on my head
yeah it's um it's on Instagram it's all
memes and then you know so we have the
memes and we have the text on Instagram
you can't really share so it's amazing
that they got the kind of engagement
that they did even without the sharing
function mm-hmm one of the things you
can do is if you know the names of the
accounts and they're a lot of them are
out there publicly now you can actually
see them in regram apps so people were
regram ikonn tent so facebook says about
20 million people
excuse-me engaged with the Instagram
content but what isn't included in that
is all of the rege Rams of the content
that were shared by other accounts so
the spread and the dispersion of this
it's an interesting an interesting thing
to try to quantify because we have
engagement data but we don't know did it
change hearts and minds we don't know if
End influenced people to go follow other
accounts we don't know if it influenced
people to not vote there's just so much
more I think still to to understand
about how these operations work we can
kind of we can assume that it had some
impact right I mean yes as you were
saying earlier when a new person enters
into a conversation that it changes the
tone event how much of what they did was
their own original post and how much of
it was commenting on other people's
posts so I thought you're actually gonna
ask a different thing there how much of
it was them repurposing our own posts
right repurposing real American content
hmm did they do that as well yeah tons
of times but let me let me so they
created a lot of their own stuff
particularly in the early days and so
you can actually read the data set and
one of the things when we started
finding these posts I was struck by how
sometimes it read like ESL and then
sometimes it read like perfect flawless
professional English and then other
times it read like normal English
vernacular just the way that we would
talk to each other and I started digging
into what that was so when it was
vernacular English when it was when it
when it read like fluent American
American English it was usually cribbed
from somewhere else so they would go and
they would find a local news story from
some obscure local paper and they would
crib and then they would paste that and
then to the Facebook post would be that
cribbed sentence from that article and
then their meme maybe they would add a
sentence underneath it to give it some
kind of context or angle when they would
write their own stuff you would see the
sloppiness that's where you could see
subject verb agreement snot quite
they're the you know ways in which like
Russian possessives are different than
American possessives the slips there and
then the other thing was the really
funny stuff which was you know a post
that's supposed it supposedly written by
Texas secessionist right so you can
probably have an image of a Texas
secessionist in your mind as I say this
and it would be things like Hillary
Clinton is a terrible individual and as
a as a terrible individual it's
completely impossible for us to back her
in her candidacy for the American
presidency
furthermore you know it's like
furthermore ergo it is clear that and
I'm like it reads like memory you're
like in you know English in college or
something you got to write a formal
essay I was like oh right so nobody
actually talks like that especially not
you know your stereotypical checks with
Texas secessionist so it was funny
seeing these incongruities and that's
unfortunately one of the best ways to
tell what you're dealing with is
actually to kind of look for those
incongruities now and see as you read
communications online like can you know
does this does this read like at
American does this read like a
communication and what we started to see
was one way to not get caught for your
lousy English or your you know yeah your
cultural
lack of kind of native native abilities
to just repurpose other people's stuff
and so that's where you would see memes
getting shared from on both the right
and the left you know you'd see a lot of
these like turning-point USA memes that
they were repurposing and pushing out or
you would see occupy Democrats or the
other 98% so memes from real American
pages real American culture and they
would just sometimes slap a new logo on
and just repost it as if it was theirs
so it does in those instances read just
like you know authentic American content
and in many ways it is authentic
American content how many people are
working for this agency do we understand
I don't remember off the top of my head
it was um summer between a couple
hundred in a thousand I think I don't
know if it's bigger than that and
they're just they just moved offices and
the funny story I guess they moved
offices and then people started calling
in bomb threats to the office and it was
just like every day a new bomb threat
would get called in so they couldn't
work basically I assume this is like
some American intelligence agency just
like fucking like um but there's people
calling in these bomb threats to try to
keep them from working and I think there
was an article that came out really
recently that said that like army cyber
or one of our one of our agencies would
work to just like take them offline
during the during the midterms couple
days around the midterms
I wonder if whoever's calling and then
is doing it and bad Russian yeah move to
this nice new office building and
someone chucked a Molotov cocktail
through the window Oh course yeah of
course spy versus spy
yeah it's I mean it only makes sense
that in this bizarre and unpredictable
and really unprotect unprecedented
environment that we find ourselves in
that something like this would come up
and just sort of throw a monkey wrench
into the gears of a real conversation
online I mean it's it's a really amazing
time in that we're getting to see this
kind of stuff happen in real time we're
getting to see these these sort of weird
attempts at manipulating things and I
think in a lot of ways successful
especially with less sophisticated
people that don't really
understand that they're being trolled
and that someone is fucking with them
and there's it seems I mean I've there's
a bunch of accounts that I have
bookmarked that I follow but I don't
follow so I don't follow them on lines I
don't want them to know I'm following
them just go to them and some of them
are so strange a few of them are Flat
Earth accounts this is something that
I'm finding yes and some of them
literally have almost no it's all memes
and they don't say much if anything
underneath the memes and I go to it I'm
like what what exactly they doing here
like what exactly they trying to do with
these because they just they're very
weird there was one that I came across I
was looking at the the conversation
around GMOs and because we have seen one
of the things that Russia does besides
the social BOTS and the you know the
American you know screen with like
Americans directly is the house so this
was a Republican House committee House
Science and Technology Committee about a
year ago said that they were seeing
evidence of both kind of overt
propaganda and then ways of
disseminating the propaganda so there's
always the dissemination and then the
accounts and then the content so it's
like you look at three different things
to try to get a handle on whether or not
this is real or fake so when we talk
about the accounts we're looking at are
they real people are they you know
automated are they not automated when
you're looking at the content you're
usually looking at the domains and
that's kind of the last piece because
you don't want to have any kind of bias
get in there but you're just trying to
see is it being pushed through like
overt Russian propaganda domains like
they're think tanks and things and then
the third is the dissemination pattern
is it being pushed out through automated
accounts is it spreading in ways that
look anomalous versus how normal
information would spread so one of the
things that the House committee looked
at was using that kind of rubric Russian
you know these dubious pieces of content
and narratives around American strategic
industries so the energy industry oil
and fracking for example
or the you see a lot of stuff with GMOs
and agriculture you know this very is
narrative of you know Putin and Russia
being the land of organic Plenty in the
United States serving its people toxic
poisoned vegetables this the sort of
stuff and meanwhile at the same time
there's competition for who's gonna get
the you know large contract to provide
rice to some part of the world so
there's like an economic motivation
underlying this this kind of narrative
and I was looking at one of these
accounts and it was tweeting an article
about Hillary Clinton a vote for Hillary
as a vote for Monsanto but it was
tweeting this and you know it was like
three months ago or something I was like
mid 2018 or late 2018 when I was looking
at this and like that ship sailed a long
time ago guys why are we why are we
tweeting about you know Hillary's votes
because they just they're just they're -
it was written by a Russian think-tank
and so they're they're just have these
automated accounts retweeting
repurposing this content from forever
ago and it doesn't even make sense it's
just out there to amplify a particular
point of view or bump up mentions of a
site what were they trying to do with
the anti-vaccine posts yeah that was a
that was an interesting thing so I would
say not much to be honest that there
were nine maybe eight hundred I think
tweets about vaccines in the content and
so Facebook and Twitter you have this
sorry Facebook and Instagram you have
this building up of tribes Twitter you
have instead they're just talking about
whatever is popular right they're
talking shit posting they're talking
about whatever is current new whatever
scandal has just broken anywhere and you
know so Twitter is less about
establishing relationships and more
about joining the conversation and
nudging it and so most of the vaccine
related posts it was not a big theme for
them it wasn't something that was on
like Facebook and Instagram where that's
where they're really leaning in like
this is what we want Americans to think
about so no mention of vaccines on those
platforms not on YouTube on Twitter you
see it in 2015 funny enough during the
Disneyland measles
break much like there's a whole lot of
conversation around vaccines right now
because of the outbreaks in Washington
and New York back in 2015 you saw the
same thing lots of conversations about
measles because the Disneyland thing
that happened down here and so they're
in there and they're saying vaccinate
your kids don't vaccinate your kids they
had a couple of conspiracy theorists
accounts I am trying to remember the
name it was a looked like a blonde woman
I think its name was Amy and Amy was a
was a conspiracy theorists and he was a
fake person amy was a fake person yeah I
wish I could remember yeah it's a
Twitter account um god what the hell was
renamed she was a me black there there a
certain of years certainly their
personas actually got a lot of lift
there was one called woke Louisa that
was a black woman there was yeah I mean
they know it right there they're not
dumb
there was 10 GOP the fake Tennessee GOP
page autonomy do you think these people
have that are creating these things I
mean are they creative or they it sounds
like some of them are actually pretty
funny yeah they are funny they're funny
that's why they work everybody thinks
it's just like you know incompetent shit
it's not it's actually really good
that's where that that's I think the
thing that you know even with whatever
you know political proclivities you may
have I think you can at least recognize
humor even if it's laughing at your side
and I will say that some of the stuff
especially targeting the the right wing
you know the right wing like youth kind
of pages were they were funny they
really were and it was I think that is
people assume that like they're too
smart to fall for it it's just those
liberals or it's just those
conservatives or you know it's it's
really it targets everybody and they
understand the psychology the motivation
the narratives and the culture and they
produce the content accordingly and I
imagine that they had a grand all time
doing it because there was some stuff in
two narratives that came out in 2017 the
first was when Facebook started to
moderate
their pages they started to scream about
how Facebook was censoring them so the
exact same narrative that you see today
about how any moderation is censorship
it's you know picture of like Zuckerberg
and it's like nice page you've got via
shame if anything happened to it you
know and that's the meme that they're
putting out there when they're
complaining that their fake page got
taken down there was tons and tons of
these memes also about the Russians did
it mocking the idea that the Russians
did it so this is as the story is
beginning to come out before we've had
the tech hearings before we've had the
Muller indictments before we've had the
investigation
you see these memes where it's like oh
my speedometer was broken it must have
been the Russians or a picture of
Hillary Clinton and it's like in a like
little golden book kind of thing and
it's like the whiny child's guide to
blaming Russia for your failures you
know and it's again it's funny like the
stuff is funny and they're like Metatron
and you imagine them sitting there like
you know they have a picture of like
some like you know buff guy carrying a
gun and they're like I'm not a Russian
troll man I'm an American okay so you're
looking at this and you're like it's
just so spot-on and again I can't see
what the people commented under it if
they were like right on or if they were
like this is bullshit but so that's
where you get it the they it you know
people think like oh I'm too smart to
fall for it or oh this is targeting
those other people no it isn't that's
the problem it's just it's going to
target you with the thing that you're
most likely to be receptive to just
because of psychological bias and and
tribal affiliation and you're not
sitting there thinking how is this
person who is purportedly just like me
screwing with me and that's why that's
why it does manage to attract a
following and get retweeted get Reshard
it's good well it's so clever because
it's so comprehensive there's so much
involved in the fact that they're
willing to do this for years and years
before they really sort of activate the
political aspect of what they're trying
to do it also it's it's strange that
they're so sophisticated about our
culture because we don't know a goddamn
thing about
the average person knows Putin bad evil
warlord Crimea he invade you know like
we we have like a four-year-old's
understanding like if you had a if you
just grabbed a person random personal
history college-educated person and ask
them to describe what's so bad about
Russia well it's like communist over
there or something man I mean fucking
they hate us first of all they have
bombs like this this so little
understanding of their culture but yet
they know so much about ours
that's one of the weird things about
being an American when you go when you
travel overseas and you realize how much
they know about our elections how much
they know we don't even know who the
fuck there is running their country we
don't have any idea but they know about
Trump and they know that Hillary did
this and they know that Bernie wants to
give the money away and you know it's
it's crazy it's it's it's weird and
these people must have like a deep
education on American culture American
politics and where do you think they're
training these kids yeah absolutely I
was so they did a couple things that
came out in the Mueller indictment first
of all a couple people actually came
here and did a road trip around America
just to learn went to Texas yeah yeah
basically Texas tell me where you keep
the beef jerky but that's that was in
the one of the I think the Mueller
indictment of from February 2018 there
have been three kind of big documents
that have come out two from Eastern
District and one from Mueller on on how
it all worked out I think another
misconception is this notion of a
hundred thousand dollars in ads they
spent eighteen million dollars in twenty
seventeen I believe was the stat that
came out during another one of the
Mueller indictments so they're not just
you know the money is not just going for
the salaries and the ad buys the money
is also going for they were talking
about using kind of consultants and this
is where you get at this thing that
comes out during the stand-up or they're
like black people who are LGBT don't
want to see white LGBT memes and and
this degree of granularity the degree of
sophistication but then also what you
see them doing is engaging one on one
and that's where it crosses the line
from social media operation to this as
much
more like like spying you watch the
Americans no I did I love that show you
should definitely heard it's great it's
great there's too many things to watch
totally but what's interesting is the it
does paint a pretty interesting picture
of like this this couple under what's
you know deep cover they are engaging
with and pretending to be Americans and
forming relationship it's based loosely
on real people
yeah that's what I've read also but what
you see in the in the Mueller indictment
is the text messages is the the
messenger at the facebook Messenger
messages where they're going back and
forth with real activists and they're
saying things like you know hey my ad
account got shut down can you run some
ads for me or the hey I want to help
your protest we're fellow black lives
matter activists and we see you're
running a protest up and I think it was
like ethica or something
Binghamton how can we help you we can
give you some money for posters and
they're sending money for posters or
they reach out to a trump supporter and
they say like we think it'd be really
funny to have a Hillary Clinton
impersonator sitting in a truck flatbed
truck that's made up to look like a jail
let us you know if we give you some
money will you find the Hillary Clinton
impersonator and put her in jail and do
this Hillary for prison thing and so
this is where another thing that they
did was using Facebook events to create
real world protests so they're not
limiting it to shit posting online and
making people feel tension online
they're actually sending people out into
the real world to have in street
violence and so one of the things that
they did was they coordinated a Facebook
event one for the Texas secessionist
page and one for the there was a
pro-muslim called United Muslims and on
the same day at the same time in Texas
they have a rally to support Texas
culture and resist the Islamization of
Texas across the street from a rally to
defend Muslim culture and so they like
there's literally no you know they just
create these Facebook events on these
pages and and then they promote them
with ad dollars another thing
and you literally if you'd go and you
look at the Texas reporting from that
day I don't remember if it was dozens or
hundreds but a sufficient number of
people showed up that they had literally
on opposite sides of barricades police
officers in the center screaming at each
other because one group is there for the
resist is long a cessation of Texas and
the other group is there to like defend
Muslim culture so you get to you know
two opposite sides of the spectrum in
the same place at the same time and you
literally in sight like a mini riot so
they were there there were about eighty
one of these events where they were
holding black lives matter style rallies
for victims of violence police violence
memorials for people who were killed by
police officers you know things that
real Americans would do but this wasn't
being done by real Americans and that's
that's the insidious thing right is how
does how does Facebook detect that how
do you know how do you when you see this
come to defend Texas culture and you're
a you know diehard proud Texan you know
you're not thinking like somebody in st.
Petersburg is is organizing this and
that's the I mean I think that the idea
that this was just some memes is just
not it doesn't respect the significance
of what they were trying to do and how
effective that they were with these
other things or even if they're just
trying it out just a little bit just
working to see what works
they're always experimenting they're
always trying to find ways to create
that tension and that's the thing that I
think is so interesting about this right
this evolving this idea of an
information war where these tactics
evolve and you are really at a
disadvantage when it comes to actually
detecting them yeah and on the outside
of you looking at that you'd say well
okay what is their objective why would
they have this Texas secessionist page
across or rally across the street from a
pro Islam rally why would they do that
you know if you're on the outside you
think the amount of effort that's
involved doing something like this and
they're also doing this with no leaders
right there's nothing there that's
running it when they get there yeah so
all the pro Texas people here we are
there's motherfuckin anime I think a
couple times there were comments on some
of the like archived pages and things
where you could see the screenshots of
people being like dude you hella this
all come out there and like nobody
showed up right who is in charge you
know they're probably throwing a lot of
things against the wall hoping that they
see something sticks well you see this
on the there was a page called black
matters and black matters was
interesting because they went and made a
whole website so they made a website
black matters you ascom which i think is
still active it's dormant they're not
updating it but I believe you can go and
and read it and it was designed to call
attention to police brutality type
things and so they had this black minors
us page and then there's the black
matters Facebook page the Twitter
account the Instagram page the YouTube
channel the SoundCloud podcast the
Tumblr the Facebook stickers they had
Facebook stickers that looked like
little black panthers like little um
little cats yeah a little black cats
they were actually really cute very well
done so you have this entire fake media
ecosystem that they've just created out
of whole cloth all theirs and then what
they start to do is they start to put up
job ads and so it's come be a designer
for us come be a come right for us come
photograph our protests come you know
they have like a kind of like black guy
dressed in a cool outfit like hipster
you know holding a sign like join black
matters you see them go through a couple
different logos the same way you would
if you were starting a you know media
brand they start posting ads for do you
want to be a calendar girl send us your
photos do you want to be on a black
reality TV show send us video clips of
you do you like they begin to do real
work to ingratiate themselves with the
community that a physical fitness thing
it was called black fist and the idea
was that it was kind of vaguely militant
desk in that it was supposed to teach
black people how to handle themselves at
protests should there be police violence
how to fight
and they actually went and found a guy
of physical fitness you know martial
arts guy and they were paying him via
PayPal so so he was running classes for
the black community under this black
fist brand and they would like text him
or call him he played some of the
voicemails on TV actually I heard them
after my report came out I think they
tracked him down and and he just talks
about how they just PayPal them you know
couple hundred bucks every time you ran
a fitness class what were the voicemails
like it was we are a black man concerned
the but police say you'd be surprised
they actually had a YouTube channel with
two black men named Williams and Kelvin
and there was this channel Williamson
Calvin and the actual black actual yeah
actually hired these gentlemen hired
these guys to be a fake YouTube channel
and it was a it was called a word of
truth I think was what the name of it
and so Williams and Calvin these two
guys would would give their word of
truth and their word of truth was
usually about you know how fucked up
America is which I mean there there are
very real grievances underlying all of
this and that's the problem
right they have things to exploit were
they writing these things for these
gentlemen I imagine I mean imagine they
were they were definitely paying them
and they organized the channel seems
likely channels organized these that
particular one I think that they were
actually they were in on it they knew
what they were doing that they knew
there were guys one of the guys who was
in that channel popped up again in 2018
right before the midterms like maybe
even the day before I'm trying to
remember the timeline here
and he made a different video saying he
wanted to this was amazing
saying he wanted to leave the internet
research agency kind of so he was saying
basically I'm tired of doing this work I
want to I want to do a leak I want to
show you all of the things that the
internet research agency has done and so
they actually put out this so this guy
who had been in the Williams and Calvin
video so people recognized his face in
the 2018 midterms goes and says he wants
to leave and he's going to
we call this information and sorry this
damn cough and he wants to to like
confess I don't remember all the
specifics because it was right before my
thing came out and I was so busy working
but but yeah he he pops up again and he
he's saying he like wants to expose the
truth
and I think most people didn't cover it
didn't pay attention YouTube shut down
the channel and deleted the video
immediately why did they do that
I think that it was seen as another
influence operation you know you don't
trust so even him saying that he's going
to expose it was probably just another
level
well wound up coming out this was this
is so convoluted I'm sorry I know it's
like hard to explain without visuals
what they wound up doing was they did
drop a bunch of docs so they did release
a pile of documents in which they
claimed they actually hacked the Mueller
investigation and Mueller had nothing
and so this is again another kind of
convoluted piece of this where they do
release information and and so in this
particular example they release
information that we believe they
actually got through legal discovery so
the documents that the investigation
provided to one of the indicted Russians
were the documents that they then leaked
claiming they had hacked the Mueller
investigation so they're constantly
doing these things to generate press
generate attention create just that
degree of people don't know what's real
or they read the headlines that are then
released by the more propagandist we
overt Russian propaganda and they think
that that is the true story that that is
that that the Russians hack the Mueller
investigation so there's always this how
do we create fear uncertainty and doubt
how do we throw people off how do we
come up with these extremely convoluted
spy games that leave people feeling
unbalanced they make people wonder what
they can trust who they can trust and
what's real and even if somebody who
looks at the stuff you know day in and
day out for years
[Music]
i-i-i-i do still regularly get surprised
by the by the sheer kind of balls eNOS
ingenuity of you know some of the stuff
is it as it comes to light well it's
really fascinating that they went so far
as to hire people to make a fake account
on YouTube and hired these black guys to
pretend that they're doing that on their
own when they're really being hired by
the Russians and then when the guys
leave you don't know if they really did
leave yeah you don't know if this is
just more bullshit it's like in like you
were saying earlier if they get you and
you buy into it hook line and sinker
they win if they get you to think well
how much else is bullshit they still win
because you're looking at everything
with sort of this tainted lens now
everything seemed and in a sense that's
probably the ultimate goal is to disrupt
our social media environment and to sort
of hijack the the natural conversations
that are taking place yeah and I think
it's I mean it's effective there's
certain you know I was in Estonia last
year and they've been targeted by this
stuff for decades now yeah they've been
25% russian-speaking population most of
the news that they get is from Russian
media right you know right on the border
they talk a lot about the extreme
commitment to educating their citizens
to make them realize that this kind of
thing does happen this is what it
usually looks like don't share it here
you know just ignore it let it go by and
I don't think we are quite there yet I
think that there's still plenty of
people in the country who don't believe
it happened or for some reason are
completely incapable of separating
the Russian social media influence
campaign happened from it means Donald
Trump's election is a legitimate or it
means Donald Trump colluded right those
are very different statements you don't
have to collude in order for someone
somewhere to unsolicited go and support
your candidacy so you can believe two
things simultaneously one that Trump did
not collude and that his election is
perfectly legitimate that this had no
impact and two that it still happened
and that I think is
I am consistently amazed when I read my
social media mentions that how hard that
ability to hold those two ideas is for
four people they just believe that if
their supporters of Trump they
absolutely cannot acknowledge that this
operation took place and I or if they
are passionate supporters of the
far-left
it's more of like an equivocation you
know well we don't really know if they
did it well the u.s. does bad things too
well how do we know you know so that's
where it it plays out very differently
depending on which part of the political
spectrum you sit on well it falls right
into our the issue that we have with
cognitive dissonance if we believe in
someone or if we want someone to win
especially if it's our team or our
person or on our side you know like I I
saw a lot of this when Donna Brazile
released her book detailing how the DNC
sort of rigged the primaries against
Bernie Sanders and for Clint there were
so many people there were Clinton
supporters it just didn't want to
believe it I was like well why wouldn't
you believe this woman like you believed
her before when she was supporting
Clinton and then when she leaves now you
won't believe her it's because it's
inconvenient and we're real weird in our
binary view we want things to be good or
bad it was 1 or 0 this is it and this is
a super complex issue it seems like
they've been doing this for a long time
and they've gotten really sophisticated
at it and I think there's a lot of
people that have been sucked into it
that have no idea that it's actually
influenced the way they've they've
formed their own opinions this is where
it gets really strange people are so
malleable and they're so easily
manipulated many people are that
something like this like a real good
solid concentrated effort to try to
target these groups that have these very
specific interests and really dig in and
form roots and then go I mean it's so
sophisticated to their approaches I'm on
one hand horrified and the other hand
deeply impressed me too
now was this freaking you out when you
had to like go over all these memes and
you were actually laughing at them
anyway god dammit
well you know there's that tweet that
goes around every now and then you don't
have to hand it to them and I'm always
like how do i how do i properly convey a
recognition for the you know i i don't
think we do ourselves any favors by
pretending it all sucked and didn't
matter and they're incompetent right i
think that you have to acknowledge that
you have a sophisticated adversary that
is very capable that is very determined
that is constantly evolving and to treat
that with the degree of respect it
deserves
i think that that's just common sense
actually i i i read media on both sides
of the aisle and i you know i feel i try
to stay current actually on what memes
are percolating in lots of different
spaces and part just because i am always
curious about what's organic versus what
seems to be disproportionately amplified
or what new communities are popping up i
just think it's an i think the spread of
information among people is just a very
interesting you know it's something that
interests me a lot i think crowd
psychology is really interesting I think
ways that crowd psychology has
transformed as the Internet has kind of
come into being particularly with things
like the mass consolidation the ease
with which we can target people you know
we didn't even really talk about that
but the one of the things with there's
all you know even in the decentralized
internet there's always been propaganda
there's always been crazy conspiracy
theories all the stuff but it's that you
can reach the people who are likely to
be receptive to it now and as people
self-select into tribes particularly in
this country right now one of the things
that's remarkable is the way in which
once you've self-selected into that
tribe and this is the media in your
ecosystem and you share it with your
friends and facebook ensures that the
people who see it are the people who are
most likely to be receptive to it or if
you run the ad targeting you directly
you know send it into the feeds of
people most likely to be receptive to it
we have this interesting phenomenon
where consolidation targeting and then
these gamma Bilal guru
mean that it's just this kind of
information goes way farther away faster
than it ever could in the past
regardless of whether it's Russia
pushing it or Iran as we've seen a you
know network of Iranian pages went down
recently we see it as globally now we
see countries targeting their own people
with it and it's just this is the
information ecosystem this is like the
new infrastructure for speech and it
sorry privileges this kind of cultural
sensationalist content yeah I do have a
house will be great cold you're going
around
don't feel bad who's who's seen all this
stuff is this sty mean it has obviously
Facebook has checked this out I'm sure
Twitter's aware what is the reaction
been and is there any sort of a
concerted effort to mitigate some of
some of the impact of these these sites
have yeah lots of it actually so I think
in in 2017 mmm
was when we started like we being
independent researchers I guess people
on the outside of the companies
academics began to find the content you
know really began to investigative
journalists would identify the name of a
page and then me and people like me
would go and we would scour the internet
looking for evidence of what was on that
page so I found a bunch of the stuff on
Pinterest for example wrote about it guy
by the name of Jonathan Albright found a
crowd tangled data cache and with that
we got the names of a bunch more pages
bunch more posts and we had some really
interesting stuff to work with
originally the platforms were very
resistant to the idea that this had
happened and so as a result of that they
were in you know there was a the first
thing that Hawks had in 2016 when you
know Trump gets elected Twitter it goes
crazy that night with people who work at
saying oh my god were we responsible for
this which is very Silicon Valley thing
to say but what I think they meant by
that was their platform had been
implicated as hosting Russian BOTS and
fake news and harassment mobs and a
number of other things and there was
always the sense that it didn't have an
impact and it didn't matter and so this
was the first time that they started to
ask the question did it matter
and then Zog made that statement fake
news is a very small percentage of you
know whatever on Facebook the amount of
information on Facebook and the idea
that it could have swung an election was
ludicrous so you have the platform's
kind of the leaders of the platforms
digging in and saying it's inconceivable
that that that this you know could have
happened and as the research and the
discovery begins to take place over the
next nine months or so you you you get
to when the tech hearings happen so I
worked with a guy by the name of Tristan
Harris he's the one who introduced me to
Sam and he he and I started going to DC
with third fellow Roger McNamee and
saying hey there's so much there's this
body of evidence that's coming out here
and we need to have a hearing we need to
have Congress ask the tech companies to
account for what happened to tell the
American people what happened because
what we're seeing here as outside
researchers what investigative
journalists are writing the things that
we're finding just don't line up with
the statements that that nothing
happened and this was all no big deal
and so we start asking for these
hearings and actually myself and a
couple of others then begin asking them
in the course of these hearings can you
get them to give you the data because
the platforms hadn't given the data so
it was that lobbying by concerned
citizens and journalists and researchers
saying we have to have some
accountability here we have to have the
platform's account for what happened
they have to tell people because this
had become such a politically divisive
issue did it even happen and we felt
like having them actually sit there in
front of Congress and account for
would be the first step towards towards
moving forward in a way but but also
towards changing the minds of the public
and making them realize that what
happened on social platforms matters and
it was it was really interesting to to
be part of that as it as it played out
because one of the things that senator
Blumenthal one of the one of the
senators did was actually said Facebook
and Twitter have to notify people who
engage with this content and so they
were there was this idea that if you are
engaging with propagandist content you
should have the right to know and so
they started to push messages Twitter
sent out these emails to all these
people saying you engaged with this
Russian troll and Facebook created a
little field a little little page that
told people if they had liked or
followed a troll page so it was really
trying to get at making the platforms
accountable but they did it outside the
platform through email huh which is
interesting because I would never read
an email that Twitter sends me right you
like this has just got to be nonsense I
didn't get one so I maybe I guess I just
got lucky but I might have had a
multiple day back and forth with some
Russian but that was I think one of the
first steps towards saying like how do
we make the platforms accountable hmm
because the idea that platforms should
be accountable was not a thing that
everybody agreed on in 2015 when we were
having this conversation about Isis and
that's where there's this the through
line here which is and it does connect
into some of the speech issues too which
is what kind of monitoring and
moderation do you want the platforms to
do and when we were having this
conversation about Isis there was a not
insignificant collection of voices that
we're really concerned that if we
moderated Isis trolls on Twitter no not
the beheading videos there were sort of
universal agreement that the beheading
videos should come down but if we took
out what we're called the ISIS fanboys
which were like 3040 thousand accounts
at their peak
that we would yeah there's a document
called the ISIS Twitter census for
anyone who wants to actually see the
research done on understanding the
Twitter network in 2015 there was a
sense that like one man's terrorist was
another man's freedom fighter and if we
took down Isis fanboys were we stifling
their freedom of speech freedom of
expression and like goodness what would
come next and that when you when you
look at that that fundamental swing that
has happened now in 2018-2019 where
there's that same narrative because
originally no moderation was taking
place and then now there's a feeling
that it's kind of swung too far in the
other direction but the original
conversations were really how do we make
Twitter take responsibility for this and
legally they aren't responsible for it
right they are legally indemnified
against the they're not responsible for
any of the content on their platforms
and none of the platforms are there's a
law called Communications Decency Act
section 230 and that says that they are
not responsible they have the right to
moderate but not the obligation to
moderate because they are indemnified
from responsibility so the question
becomes now that we know that these
platforms are used for these kinds of
harms and they are used for this kind of
interference where is that balance what
do we want them responsible for
monitoring and moderating and how do we
how do we recognize that that is
occasionally going to lead to an
incorrect attributions people losing
accounts and things like that
so yeah they're there in a weird
conundrum right now where they don't
exaggerate on the platform so they want
to keep people from harassing folks but
because of that they've also they've got
these algorithms and they they tend to
miss very often like this whole learn to
code fiasco where people getting banned
for life for saying learn to code which
is about as preposterous as it gets I
think they learn to code Fiasco is going
to be the tipping point where a lot of
people in the
in the future when they look back on
when did the heavy handedness become
overreach learn to code because I mean
Jesus Christ I mean that if you can't
say learn to code I mean I look at my
mentions I mean on any given day
especially like yesterday I had vaccine
proponent Peter's great and in you know
and it seemed like what was really
disturbing to me was like the vast
majority of the comments were about
vaccines and so few about these
unchecked diseases that are running
rampant in poor communities which is the
most disturbing aspect of the
conversation to me that there's diseases
that robbed you of your intellectual
capacity that are extremely common that
as many as 10% of people in the poor
neighborhoods have almost no discussion
it was all just insults and and you know
you fucking chill you know it's my
mentions are gonna be interesting but
well they're gonna be a disaster
I think that one of the challenges for
the platforms there's a lot of things
start out like learned code I remember I
watched that play out Covington Catholic
was another thing that I mean God would
learn to code there was some of the
people who were trolling and just saying
learn to code and you know whatever you
don't have a right to not be offended
but then there was the the other
accounts that kind of took at that step
further and began to throw in like the
ovens and the other stuff you learn to
code right and that's one of the
challenges with the platform which is if
you're trying to assess the just the
content itself like if you start doing
key word bands right you're gonna catch
a lot of shit that you don't want to
catch right but the flip side is if you
you know the this is the challenge of
moderating at scale which is where you
know what what side do you come down on
do you come down on saying like 75% of
people with hashtag learn to code or
just you know not doing anything
incredibly offensive and then the 25
percent who are they really change the
tone of the overall campaign and
tag for the entire community and that's
where you see Twitter I think come in
with the more heavy-handed and just shut
it down kind of thing I don't I don't
know that there's an easy answer I think
that we are you know even today what was
the latest kerfuffle Elizabeth Warren
got an ad taken down on Facebook and
then there was a whole conversation
about was Facebook censoring Elizabeth
Warren I I personally didn't think that
it read like censorship what was the ad
about it was um it was an ad about funny
enough her platform to break up Facebook
it sort of read more like a cellphone
like she had a picture of Facebook's
logo in the in the image and there that
violates the ads Terms of Service and
the reason behind that is actually
because Facebook doesn't want people
putting up ads that have the Facebook
logo in it because that's how you scam
people right that's a great way to trip
people often so probably just like an
automated you know an automated take
down like an automated like it halts the
ad you have to go and make some changes
then you can push the ad back out again
but it just happens at a time when
there's like so little assumption of
good faith and so little assumption of
such extreme anger and polarization and
you know assumption that the platforms
are censoring with with every little
kind of moderation snafu that it it
makes it I think I don't know how we
have the conversation in a way that's
healthy and looks towards solutions as
opposed to the left screaming that it
censored the right screaming that it's
censored the platform's you know trying
to get around how do we both moderate
and not moderate which is a tough
position to be in
I think yeah I don't have any good the
issue Invidia discussed that pretty much
in depth what she was saying this is
about moderating and scale when you're
talking about millions and millions and
millions of posts and a couple thousand
people working for the organization and
then algorithms and computer learning
that's trying to keep up and that's
where things like learn to code and
people are so
outraged and pissed off because when
they do get banned they feel like
they've been targeted well you really
just ran into some code and then it's
really hard to get someone to pay
attention to your appeal right because
there's not enough people that are
looking at these Appeals and there's
probably millions of Appeals every day
it's almost impossible yeah and there's
you know depending on which which side
you're on you also hear like this person
is harassing me and I'm demanding
moderation and nobody's doing anything
about it yes so it's definitely I think
gotten worse you it's it's interesting
to look back at 2016 and wonder how much
of the where we are now is in part
because not a whole lot happened in 2016
and 2016 it was or 2015 in particular
very light like almost no moderation
just kind of let it all hang out there
and I look at it I look at it now
particularly as it evolved into this
conversation about free speech public
squares and what the new kind of
infrastructure for speech and what
rights we should expect on it it's a
really tough you know I think some of it
is is almost like the people who are who
hear the words free speech and they just
assume that it's people asking for a
carb loss right to harass and saying you
know how do we balance that needed I
think jack and vijaya are saying this on
your show how do we maximize the number
of people who are involved make sure
that all voices do get heard without
being unnecessarily heavy-handed and
moderating a thought or content and
instead moderate behavior and instead
moderate particular types of signatures
of things that are inauthentic or things
that are coordinated and looking at this
again gets to disinformation too rather
than trying to police disinformation by
looking at content really looking
instead at actions and behavior and
account authenticity and dissemination
patterns because a lot of the worst
trolls and stuff are just using these
throwaway account
and the name yeah disappear well I have
the impression myself that when we're
talking about censorship we're talking
about moderating content that really
we're talking about this current era and
that what's coming is essentially we're
like putting up a small like twig fence
and a herd of stampeding buffaloes on
the way in terms of the the more
invasive or the more the more potent
levels of Technology that are on the way
I just feel like I feel like we're
everything is moving in a very specific
direction and that very specific
direction is less boundaries between
people and information and that includes
communication and it's going to be
insanely impossible insanely difficult
or nearly impossible to to moderate in
ten years I just don't think I don't
think that's going to be I don't think
it's going to be in the wheelhouse I
just I think it's going to we're
entering into some weird place where we
either gonna have to stay off of social
media because it's just too toxic or
grow a thick skin and just be able to
deal with anything and then if that's
the case how are we going to be able to
differentiate between things that are
particularly designed to to manipulate a
specifically designed to manipulate us
and change our opinions by foreign
entities like this you know this Russian
troll farm I do think the the you know
when I think about like so if we believe
that disinformation is in part
facilitated by game of all algorithms
consolidation and then the targeting the
kind of things we've talked about
through this conversation then I think
that the algorithms piece the
manipulatable algorithms that's really
squarely the responsibility of the
platforms I don't think that there's any
regulation or you know any kind of
framework that's gonna come from
Congress that's going to address that
well thats pretty clear from the
facebook hearings right i mean they
barely understand out an Android phone
and iphone they really don't know what's
going
Tim Apple yeah that's the king of the
world he says he did that on purpose
which is even more hilarious just say
fucked up man I mean to say that you
knew Tim Cook his real name wasn't Tim
Apple I did I appreciated the rest of
like every CEO and Silicon Valley
changing their Twitter yeah yeah that
was fun what I think the thought on that
- sorry we're talking about you were
talking about them oh yeah any algorithm
regulating yeah so I I think that
ultimately the algorithmic piece does
remain squarely in the purview of the
platforms and that's because it's an
arms race right as they change their
algorithm a little bit tweak it for the
product function mm-hmm which they just
do in their roles business there is no
regulation that's going to come down
fast enough to catch that I think
actually finance is an interesting
parallel here cuz like in the financial
markets they're kind of multi tiered
levels of regulation and oversight so
that there's always some entity
responsible whether it's the exchange or
a self-regulatory organization or the
government the SEC looking to see if
like information integrity in the
markets is being maintained right
there's no shitty algorithm coming in to
manipulate people it's just making sure
that we have that level of trust so I
think that right now the tech ecosystem
is lacking regulation in all of its
forms so that will likely change but the
argument for decentralization is I don't
know how you execute it I the antitrust
thing in particular is it as it comes up
so much more now just me I don't know
under what economic grounds you make
that claim that's way outside of my
wheelhouse and in my area but there is
something to be said for this you know
return to decentralization in some way
like it lets people have what they want
it lets you you know read it's a great
example you have these almost like
federalism you have this central
platform but then you have these little
communities under it and each community
has its own norms each community has its
own
rulz nobody who violates the moderator
rules in a reddit and scream censorship
is really taken seriously right
this is the rules of the community or in
the community there you go and this was
how in the olden days of the internet
like use nets and things you would have
this is the community that you've chosen
to be a part of if you don't like the
moderation standards you go to this
other community wrong I think the
concern with consolidation is that
people who do get moderated away feel
like there's nowhere for them to go that
they've lost access to the entire world
so I think if you have that
decentralization it in some ways it it
it stops being quite so much of a
freedom of speech issue if you can't
speak on you if you if everything is
like if there's 50 different platforms
and you fall afoul of some sort of norms
or standards or community membership and
this one you can go over here to this
other one run then the idea that
somebody has moderated you away or D
platform to you or something is much
less potent maybe if they're already so
if you dock someone or something long
federalism think they're little
moderation at the lower levels versus
kind of top level like you're summarily
booted off yeah that seems like the best
approach right like it seems like the
best approach is to sort of let these
communities sort of establish themselves
but even inside those communities then
you have people that gain power through
moderation and they start abusing it and
then it becomes some sort of a weird
hierarchy it's like the decentralization
in general it's probably the right move
for all this stuff but how does that
happen with something like Facebook or
Twitter without government intervention
and I you know that's one of the things
that Tim Poole is bringing up like if
you guys don't do this if you don't
handle this it's entirely possible
somewhere down the line you're going to
be regulated by the government do you
really want that yeah at this point yeah
well you know honestly I say that no I
back to the reality oh it isn't Miss
Congress with this executive I don't
know how we get any regulation through I
I think we've seen some examples like
the honest ads Act which was introduced
right before the first Tech hearing if
I'm remembering the timeline correctly
so that would have been like late 2017
and what they said was it's you can no
longer have like a free-for-all with ads
on social platforms where nobody knows
who paid for it or where it's coming
from or anything like that and and what
they you know that so senator Klobuchar
and Senator Warner and I think Senator
McCain also was was part of this create
this law saying that the platforms have
to follow the rules that TV and radio
already follow and this is an example of
recognizing the role that that you know
these are no longer startups that can't
be you know that can't meet these
obligations it used to be that Facebook
was exempt from these from these
disclosure requirements because their
ads used to be those remember those tiny
postage stamp-sized things that were on
the right side of the page mm-hmm
so they're finding it was they were they
were given the same exemption that
campaigns get for like skywriting and
postage and pencils you know where it's
like literally the form factor of the
content makes it such that you can't put
the ad disclaimer on there hmm and it
used to be that all of the advertising
on Facebook was regulated using that
same finding that that that these
postage stamp-sized things are too small
to put the disclosures on and then of
course as we know that evolved into the
ads being looking much like an organic
post and so now they do have these
little little things that pop up where
you can see why you got targeted and
what it is I think that that's an
example of like the credible threat of
regulation and the public opinion moving
the platform to take an action that it
wouldn't have necessarily done on its
own so it's not regulation but it's it's
a nudge through public opinion and the
credible threat of future right
we've seen California go after the
platform's also recently there was a
California GDP our thing from last year
California State Legislature saying
we're going to pass a privacy
requirement and and they did it they got
it done
what is the privacy requirement oh boy I
feel like I'm probably not the best
person to explain this because I don't
know the specifics but the gdpr was the
law in the UK and in Europe that
protects the data
it creates particular protections like
your you have to re opt-in for targeting
there's certain kinds of targeting that
they can't do certain types of data that
you can request they delete so this is a
provision that took effect in Europe
last year we don't have that same law
here in the US where we don't have the
same data protections as the Europeans
and so California gdpr was the
california state government the state
senate legislature passing a law that
basically mimicked a lot of the
provisions of what the europeans were
given under gdpr but what that did was
it created a law that applied to the
people of California and so Facebook and
Twitter and the others don't want to be
in a position of having to have this you
know kind of balkanization or bomb of
legal requirements and so they in turn
have now I believe gone to Congress
suggesting that a that we're going to
need to have a federal solution that
applies to all of the u.s. so a federal
level privacy regulation because they
don't want to have to adhere to the
privacy regulations of like each
individual US state one solution that's
been tossed up was that people would
have to somehow another confirm their
identity then instead of it being an
anonymous post that it would have to say
Renee Durr esta like I know who you are
you have to have a photograph have some
sort of a government ID shows that it's
you that we would somehow or another
minimized trolling minimize
disinformation if you if your account
was connected to a social security
number or whatever it was the problem of
course is that these things get hacked
all the time and if your Twitter account
gets hacked now
have your social security number they
have your address they have your
information that you use to sign up and
you know there's a lot of unless there's
some way and there isn't
- absolutely lock down all that data and
make sure that it's inaccessible to some
sort of third party that doesn't seem
like a likely course of action either I
think the question of identity I think
most social science research that I've
read has suggested that that's not
necessarily to be all and end all I
think it depends on per your point what
you're trying to do I'm thinking right
now of the there is this request for FTC
comments for net neutrality and I know
that a lot of them were you know whoever
left them their Lots huns I think
millions actually of these fake comments
that were left on the net neutrality
call for public comment where they were
scraping like that you know those um
those crappy data brokers those horrible
things were like your name and your
address is up there and no matter how
hard you try you can't get it yes so
scraping those to grab names and
addresses and then email addresses and
leaving leaving comments pretending to
be those people it's it's hard nobody
most people don't want to enter their
social security number into some form or
validation right a lot of people will
point to things like well you know
America has a strong commitment to
anonymous speech so but there's that
cultural thing well I mean you know
people are going to like yeah Federalist
Papers and various and so on and so
forth whistleblowers and whistleblowers
you know I think I've seen I remember
when Facebook did make it a requirement
- you have to validate your actual name
and address they send a postcard to your
house if you want to run political ads
and then I remember people complaining
that people who didn't have you know
that this was going to I was it god this
was during the daca arguments so wrote
that yeah during that
this was during some of the illegal
immigration debates right right as this
was happening
people began complaining that
immigration activists who were
undocumented would not be able to run
Facebook ads because they didn't have a
you know identification to verify with
so no matter what people put out there's
going to be somebody who has a complaint
about it I'm sure so we're gonna miss
this like this gridlock everybody
recognizes that the situation sucks and
that social media is a disaster on a
myriad number of fronts and there's not
much in the way of plausible solutions I
think for disinformation in particular
just to stay in my wheelhouse we're
trying to push towards
multistakeholderism which is just to say
can we create the back-channel channels
of communication that have come up for
election integrity and things over the
last few years last year and a half can
we standardize that in some way can we
create an oversight body maybe the FTC
that is at least responsible for having
some oversight to make sure the
platforms are doing enough but this is I
think this is going to be the theme of
2019 does it does it go the antitrust
route does it go the privacy route like
does it do a kind of hybrid combination
of multiple you know tackling multiple
problems that wants a really curious to
see how we shake this out because it
just seems like no you know even
agreeing on what the problem is we're
not quite there yet you know and you're
you are seeing calls like particularly
from Elizabeth Warren for breaking up a
lot of these larger institutions not
just but not just even social media but
even Amazon she's talking about breaking
up a lot of these bigger companies it's
the problem with that is like to what
and make them what and then what happens
and then you know one of that what if
one of those things that you broke up
that becomes Twitter becomes more
popular than the other Twitter and it
has much more attendance than what do
you do yeah you should get one of those
people onto
to just talk about that because Lina
Connor or somebody who really Matt
Stoller knows this space in and out and
I just don't the I you know personally
what I feel like the a lot of people are
moving into smaller communities a lot of
people are moving into groups are moving
into whatsapp chat 13 recognizing that
this system as it is right now has this
toxicity and are withdrawing a bit I
don't know if you've seen this in your
friends your community but well I have
it Jamie and I we're actually talking
about it yesterday in terms of the the
use of Twitter that the use of Twitter
has dropped and um one thing that I
noticed is that my follower numbers
doesn't move very much on Twitter as
opposed to like Instagram I don't really
use Facebook but Instagram there's a
giant difference in how many followers I
get per day on either platform and it
seems to me that the people that are
using Twitter they've kind of like
locked in they've found their little
communities and it's mostly toxic I mean
I mean I'm sure I'm generalizing I'm not
it's I am for sure it's probably not
even 10 percent toxic but it seems toxic
you know when you look at those kind of
comments and anytime something happens
it seems like the reaction to it is very
rarely is it some sort of objective
rational discourse it's most likely just
insults and you know swears it's weird
it's just people are communicating in a
way online that if they communicated in
real life there would be blood in the
streets I think about that a lot
actually yeah I do I think that the what
are the you know especially I was
listening to your tear thing with with
Tim and and and Jack and Vijaya the idea
of the public square and I use this
metaphor to like when I write about them
that the the privatized public square
but then I think about it sometimes I'm
like we've never had a national public
square there is no such thing in the
history of America as a
national public square there are
regional public squares or town squares
state squares you know where there is
again this kind of federalism people who
have self selected to live in a
particular community there's norms in
that community but if I were to go up to
you in a public square and start
screaming in your face or you know being
an asshole and trying to get a whole mob
together to go after you like probably
somebody would intervene either a
bystander or the police and we have
notions of like nuisance and things like
that we have notions of like there's
there's more of an intuitive sense of
the balance between speech which is to
be protected and then the kind of
fighting words and that sort of thing
there's no clear lines on that there's
not much in the way of norms and when
you're online there is nobody who's
going to come and step in and intervene
in a way that would play out in in real
life so the I think that we have we just
haven't quite ported those norms of
basic good behavior in the real world
into this massive roiling crowd that's
just sort of always on at all times and
that's that's sort of more where we are
on social media well I think there's
actually a carryover to real life from
social media that you can find in these
protests at universities when
conservative speakers come and then and
Tifa wants to shut them down and then
you have people like the proud boys
fight with antifa I don't remember that
before ever I think this is this is a
byproduct of the type of communication
that's the norm on social media I really
think that's what's happening here I
really think that instead of social
media mimicking real life real life is
starting to mimic the kind of
interactions that people have on social
media and with violent repercussions
it's certainly if not violent very
aggressive and angry in a way that I go
back before social media when was the
Latin in 2000 and the 1990s how often
were there these in incredibly volatile
protests at universities where you have
conservatives and liberals screaming at
each other and you have these these
people that are being deep lat
and they won't let him speak at these
colleges and then they're there
gathering up this online mob to try to
stir support and then people come to
meet them we're gonna stop them at all
costs and it's kind of its kind of
flavoring real life versus real life
being represented in social media yeah I
don't I don't remember it from when I
was in college either no didn't exist
not not the expert on you gotta go back
College protests and that you know maybe
people would point to the 60s go back to
Kent State that's what I was gonna say
you gotta go back to war protest but
they were protesting something very
specific an unjust war that nobody
wanted to be a part of this is a weird
time yeah it is I know it feels unstable
yes yes that's the best way but it's
also awesome I'm enjoying the shit out
of it I mean well because I I love the
fact that it did for the first time in
my life it does not seem like the
government has a fucking handle on how
people are behaving and thinking at all
like they don't know what's going on
it's like you've got people that are you
know the people that are trying out
socialist tropes and and socialist ideas
for the first time in the mainstream and
they're getting a big groundswell of
support behind it then you have a lot of
people that are like Pro nationalists
and pro America for the first time in a
long time and that's getting a lot of
support there's more discourse now even
if it's toxic and I think a lot of it
isn't I think like I said if 10% is
toxic it seems like it's all toxic one
hour ten people calls you a piece of
shit you're like I gotta get out of this
fucking forum right I mean that's that's
really I think there's definitely I've
noticed that too the actual numbers of
horrible trolls or maybe this afternoon
will be different I don't know but
really I you know I'm on Twitter a lot
and it's the platform I use more than
any other so for all the you know for
all the complaints I do feel like
there's some real value there
for me personally and and I I like I
like the serendipity of of the
unexpected being pushed into my feet
occasionally sometimes it's you know
sometimes of course I get angry or you
know feel annoyed or think why the hell
them you know why I'm why this but I
think ultimately the there is a lot of
value to the platform
I think we're unfortunately I really do
believe that so much of the polarization
in the conversation around speech is
people who got burned during the lays a
fair days of 2015-2016 in mentally
linking up the idea of free speech with
the idea of being harassed online and I
think when you look at this is purely an
opinion I've absolutely no data to bear
this out but when you look at those Pew
studies that show that younger people
are more likely to want you know in safe
spaces or less you know less offensive
opinions I I do sometimes wonder if
that's a an effective coming of age at a
point when you know random assholes were
screaming at you on social platforms
24/7 versus like I didn't have that
experience growing up I didn't have that
experience until I was like 25 you know
so um so maybe there is something per
your point about that the almost there
is not much of a difference as you know
people spend so much time online this is
where you're having your social
engagements is where you're having your
conversations so it does shape the way
people think about you know their
experience of what it means to have a
conversation and what it means to speak
freely I think that's one of the
interesting you know it doesn't help
that the that free speech has sometimes
in many cases become a fig leaf or I
want carte blanche to you know say all
kinds of mean shit to people all day
long with no consequences they think
they should be able able to do that
because that falls into the blanket of
free space there's also an issue I think
with young kids today
that have smartphone addictions people
today I should say forget young kids how
about me humans smartphone addictions
and when you're online and we think
about the majority of your interactions
with human beings but there's a lot of
folks that are on their phone eight
hours in a day that's probably me think
about those interactions that's a
shocking number of interactions with
people that you're not even in direct
physical the presence of your you're not
looking at them you're not you're not
waiting for them to talk you're not
considering what they're saying you know
reading social cues all the things that
make us human those are all thrown out
the window you're just looking at text
yeah and it might be coming from Russia
the text that you're getting it upset at
and responding to mean per your research
really there's a direct possibility it's
not even a fucking person or a person
but not not really representing their
actual thoughts just trying to push your
buttons yeah no that's true it's it's
not in Russian trolls it's just the the
amount of I think it really is we're in
the unique time where it's hard to know
who you're engaging with it's hard to
gauge whether it's good faith its I mean
I react sometimes where I'll see a
response and go click into the person's
feed to try to decide if I should take
this as a seriously good faith inquiry
or if it's like a like a you know kind
of vaguely cloaked fuck you you know
right you don't have to do that when
you're in person it's a very different
experience yeah I have a friend of mine
who's a young single male and he was
going through his direct messages and
these girls were sending him all these
naked photos and videos and he's like
look at this man I go let me see your
phone and I said let me click on that
link I go she has one picture on her
page you fucking dummy this is probably
not even a person like who knows what
this is someone from Nigeria is trying
to get your information yeah catfishing
yeah I mean they're trying to get you
he's like oh yeah like wow how do you
did not go to her pages I just you know
I thought it was a girl side of me naked
pictures
they just do that sometimes well they
definitely do do that sometimes but I
mean people are weird they do all kinds
of weird things but you know there's
there's a lot of these fake accounts and
I don't know what they're trying to do
they're trying to get money from people
or that does come up I've seen every now
and then if you follow reporters on
Twitter particularly once we have like
open DMS they'll periodically post the
insane catfishing stuff that they get
was like all about money or yes I don't
have I don't know I god bless people who
have opened and I don't know how they do
it yeah I don't get it
so overall are you happy that you got
into all this does this does this change
your perceptions of online communication
I feel like there's I have tried over
the years whether it's conspiracy
theorists communities or terrorists or
or you know Russia Iran State the
state-sponsored actors the domestic
ideologues I have tried to always say
like here is the specific kind of
forensic analysis of this particular
operation and then here is what we can
maybe take from it and make make changes
we've we've seen some of that begin to
take shape and so I feel grateful to
have had the opportunity to work towards
connecting those dots and work towards
having this conversation meaning meaning
helping people understand what's going
on I think I am NOT I am most concerned
about the as this gets increasingly easy
to do through things like chat BOTS you
know now there's these you've seen the
the website this person does not exist
comm know so it's a there's a technology
called it's a machine learning technique
generative adversarial networks and they
these basically they're in this
particular application and working to
create pictures of people faces of
people and so this website is when you
go to it it pulls up a
yeah there you go so this person does
not actually exist
yeah and so these are all these are
computer-generated yep it says it down
at the bottom there so these are not
real people and so we have increasingly
sophisticated chat technology we have
increasingly sophisticated like you're
not going to detect that image somewhere
else that old trick of like right-click
and look and see if you're talking to
someone with a stock photo that goes
right out the window is stuff like this
gets easier and easier to do well then
deep faking right yeah the deep fakes on
the video front I think that it does
change I think we haven't quite adapted
to what is it like to live in a world
where so much of the internet is fake
yeah and I do think per your point about
identity that there will be groups of
people that self-select into communities
where identity is mandatory you know
where this is who you are and you have
some sort of verification versus people
who choose to live in the world of you
know drink from the fire hose take it
all in and try to filter it out yourself
so we look at these evolving
technologies and I don't necessarily
feel you know particularly optimistic in
the short term I think that it
ultimately it does like we chained as a
society to a large extent and in
response to this we think about you know
there going to be some fixes that the
platforms are gonna be able to undertake
there going to be we're going to get
better at detecting this stuff maybe and
you know the adversary will evolve
hopefully we get better at detecting it
as it evolves but it's I think we
fundamentally ultimately change like
people become more aware that this is a
thing they are more skeptical that does
change are there are ways of interacting
with each other but I feel like that is
going to be the direction that this goes
there's the more like you know the thing
that keeps me up at night would be more
the the ease of turning this from a
social media problem into like a real
world war problem meaning as an example
back in 2014 when the first things the
internet research agency did September
11th 2014 they created a
folks saying that Isis had attacked a
chemical plant down in Louisiana it's
called the Columbia the Columbia
chemical plant hoax is I think there's a
Wikipedia article about it now but what
happened was they created a collection
of websites they created fake sin and
mock-ups Twitter accounts text messages
that went to local people radio station
Collins you name it everything to create
the impression that a chemical factory
had just exploded in Louisiana and there
was some attribution to Isis and this
was done on September 11th so this is
the kind of thing where this actually
did go viral
like I remember this happening not as a
social media researcher I just remember
it actually being pushed into my social
media feed so you have these and we
didn't know that it was in a research
agency for a year and a half after but
this is the kind of thing where you look
at parts of the world that aren't the
u.s. like the recent drama between India
and Pakistan and you can see how these
kinds of things can go horribly horribly
wrong if the wrong person is convinced
that something has happened or if
there's a you know or if this leads to a
riot or if this leads to real world
action I think that's one of the main
fears as this gets better and better the
video fakes get better the people fakes
get better what you know what do you do
then so yeah what do you do you see
those images those images fake images
those are stunning
they're so good I mean it just makes you
wonder I mean and we're gonna get to a
point where if someone's not in front of
you talking you're gonna look at a video
you're not gonna have any idea you know
they're doing those deep fakes with a
great famous actresses faces and they
put them in porn films and it's it's
stunningly good I mean it's it's amazing
and they're there also with someone like
me I'm fucking doomed because there's
thousands of hours of me talking I've
said everything yeah so you could take
this new there's these new programs that
are editing audio and you could splice
together audio and video now they don't
even splice at the computer will
generate yeah yeah just it's insane it
generates your lip movements everything
I mean it's really stunning it's really
stunning and it's only gonna get crazier
and crazier and it's gonna be very
difficult to unless something is
actually happening right in front of
your face it's gonna be very difficult
to be able to differentiate and then I'm
worried about augmented reality and
virtual reality in this stuff making its
way into it we're gonna dive willingly
with a big smile on her face into the
matrix how do you watch no I haven't i
watch that on a plane like a month ago
or something it was a corny so no it
holds up really well it's like it's it's
insane except for it's a except for the
phone booths but everything else is well
yeah it's it's just free why I just
bought it on 4k cuz like actually not in
99 there wasn't barely HD back then I
just wanted to see what it was like we
watched it forgot how good it was and
like two two and a half hours flew by
yeah it's it's amazing how that seemed
preposterous in 99 or whatever it was
like oh this is just sci-fi and now
you're like hey this is a little closer
it's like the idea of have you messed
around at all with like HTC vive or
oculus I I tried I was a VC briefly like
back and I'm back in five six years ago
now and I tried one from I think it's
USC right the Southern California is a
bunch of really good labs down here and
I tried one where it was like a zombie
holodeck simulator mmm and it was um it
wasn't just the VR it was also it was
immersive so they had a backpack on me
and it was it was actually scary as hell
yeah I was like this is really good this
is I like I love first-person shooters I
think there's so much fun but this was
just the first time we're in the in the
game you have like a bat or something
and you're you're beat zombies together
with a bat or like all up in your face
and I don't know if that thing ever came
to market but Dan was it good well they
have a company called a it's called the
void now and they have this wreck-it
Ralph one and I did it with my kids
recently and you put on a haptic
feedback vest and you go through this
environment
and it's great I mean you're it's very
clear that you're in a video game it
doesn't seem real but it is so much
better than anything that existed five
years ago and you go okay well what is
it with the exponential increase in
power of technology what is this gonna
be like in ten days what's it gonna be
like in 15 it's gonna be impossible
differentiate cuz now it's a vest it's
just a vest you're not strapped into a
chair you can move around so you're
going through this whole warehouse that
they have set up for these games you've
been picking up physical objects they
look different in your hands than they
do when you when you look at them
without the headgear on there's like
centers for that like they have one
outside of Disneyland it's in Disney
Downtown Disney yeah it's called the
void and then you go into these there's
one Star Wars one as a record Ralph one
now they have them in malls small ones
you sit in these little eggs and you go
on rollercoaster rides and you fight off
zombies and go into a haunted house it's
getting weird and it's just that weird
weird you know I was a kid when video
games were these ridiculous Atari things
we stuck a cartridge in and you're
playing pong and now we're looking at
something that you're looking at these
images of people you see Poor's you see
there you see there the glistening of
their lips you see their eyes it's it's
very strange it's very strange to think
that those are not really people and
that we are probably going to look at
the all you have to do is create
something that is so large and and the
propaganda the so terrifying that it
causes you to act without
double-checking and triple-checking and
making sure you verify the fact that
something has really happened and then
it sets into motion some physical act in
the real world that you can't pull back
like and this is just not related
necessarily but what happened with
Hawaii when they got that false warning
my gosh that nuclear missiles were
headed their way
yeah that was a imagine it was crazy yes
and it was just someone hit the wrong
button yeah I mean if we come to some
sort of a point in time where someone
does something like that on purpose and
shows you video
that you really think New York City just
got nuked and you know you have to head
to the hills and there's a giant traffic
jam on the highway and people start
shooting each other I mean if if Russia
really wants to fuck with us what
they're doing now with just this you
know this IRA agency and all of these
different trolls that they've got set up
that's sort of trying to get people to
be in conflict with each other this is
this is with primitive crude texts and
memes what could be done in the future
it's terrifying little weird world yeah
yep we're in agreement yep
let's end it there all right thank you
so much I really appreciate it thanks
for coming down and thank you for all
your work and exposing all this stuff
it's really really interesting and
terrifying tell people how they can get
a hold of you so they control you on
twitter my handle is at no upside no
upside and you don't necessarily have an
Instagram it's more like family my
instagrams my kids yeah all right Thank
You Renee I really appreciate it thank
you bye everybody
[Music]